India - Drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and housing condition : NSS 69th Round : July 2012- Dec 2012
Evaluation Only. Created with Aspose.Words. Copyright 2003-2023 Aspose Pty Ltd.
ICSSR Data Service: Social Science Data Repository
India - Drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and housing condition : NSS
69th Round : July 2012- Dec 2012
National Sample Survey Office - M/o Statistcs and Programme
Implementation(MOSPI),Government of India (GOI)
Report generated on: August 5, 2016 Visit our data catalog at: http://icssrdataservice.in/datarepository/index.php
Overview
Identification
ID NUMBER DDI-IND-MOSPI-NSSO-69Rnd-Sch1dot2-2012
Version
VERSION DESCRIPTION
V1.0; Re-organised anonymised dataset for public distribution.
PRODUCTION DATE 2014-01-28
Overview
ABSTRACT
Housing is a basic requirement of human well-being. Along with the requirement of shelter, other facilities in the micro environment of housing such as type of dwelling unit, drinking water, sanitation, hygiene, etc., form vital components of overall quality of life of the population. The survey on drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and housing condition has been designed to collect information on the different aspects of living conditions necessary for decent and healthful living of the household members. Information on these aspects will relate to the household as a whole. On drinking water, important information will be collected on (i) sources and sufficiency of drinking water, (ii) distance to the source of drinking water and (iii) quality of drinking water. On the sanitation facilities, information will be collected on (i) access to latrine, in terms of exclusive use, common use or no access, (ii) type of latrine, (iii) reason for not using latrine for the households which have access to latrine but not using. Some information on micro-environment surrounding the house that will be collected relate to (i) garbage disposal, (ii) drainage arrangement, (iii) problem of flies/mosquitoes. Other information on housing condition like, age of the house, condition of the house, type of the dwelling unit (viz., pucca, semi-pucca and katcha), floor area of the dwelling unit, sources of financing for construction/purchase of houses/flats for residential purpose will also be collected. 
Using the information collected in this survey, important indicators of living facilities that can be developed are: proportion of households (i) using improved sources of drinking water, (ii) getting sufficient drinking water, (iii) fetching drinking water from outside premises, (iv) using improved latrine facilities, (v) having garbage disposal arrangement, (vi) having draining arrangement. On the characteristics of the house and dwelling unit, important indicators are (i) proportion of households living in different types of dwelling units, (ii) distribution of the households by age the house, (iii) per capita floor area, (iv) proportion of households that undertook construction/purchased houses with different sources of finance. These indictors will be developed, at the national and state level, cross classified by level of living of the households (measured by MPCE), social group, etc.These statistical indicators are required for planning, policy and decision making at various levels both within government and outside. These indicators will be extensively used by various Government Organisations viz., Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allevation, Town and Country Planning Organisation, Planning Commission, etc. The indicators on improved sources of drinking water and sanitation are required to monitor the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) with respect to drinking water and sanitation. These will also be used by organisations like WHO, UNICEF and various users, researchers and policy makers.
KIND OF DATA Sample survey data [ssd]
UNITS OF ANALYSIS
Randomly selected households based on sampling procedure.
Scope
NOTES
In the present round, Schedule 1.2 on housing condition consists of 10 blocks. The blocks are as follows:
Block 0 : Descriptive identification of sample household.
Block 1 : Identification of sample household
Block 2 : Particulars of field operations
Block 3:household characteristics
Block 4:particulars of living facilities: drinking water, bathroom, sanitation, etc.
Block 5:housing characteristics and micro environment for the households living in houses Block 6:particulars of the dwelling for the households living in houses
Block 7:some general particulars of the households living in houses
Block 8:remarks by investigators (FI/ASO)
Block 9:comments by supervisory officer(s)
The first three blocks, viz. Blocks 0, 1 and 2, are used to record identification of sample households and particulars of field operations, as is the common practice in usual NSS rounds. Similarly, the last two blocks, viz., Blocks 8 & 9 are again the usual blocks to record the remarks of investigator (FI/ASO) officer and comments by supervisory officer (s), respectively. Block 3 will be used for recording the household characteristics like household size, gender and age of the head of the household, highest level of education separately among the male and female members of the household, principal industry and occupation, religion, social group, household type, land possessed, tenurial status of dwelling, area type in which the dwelling unit is located, maximum distance to the place of work normally travelled by any earner of the household, monthly household consumer expenditure, amount spent and sources of finance for those households which have spent some
amount on construction/first-hand purchase of houses/flats for residential purpose during last 365 days, etc. Block 4 will be used for recording the particulars of living facilities, such as principal source of drinking water, sufficiency of drinking water from principal source, facility of bathroom, access to bathroom, access to latrine, type of latrine, problems of
flies/mosquitoes, specific types of illness of household members during last 30 days, availability of electricity for domestic use, etc. Particulars of housing characteristics and micro environment, such as plinth level, number of floors in the house, use of house, period since built, condition of structure, drainage system, household waste water disposal system, arrangement made for collection of garbage from house, etc., will be collected in Block 5. Block 6 is for collecting
information on particulars of dwelling such as number of rooms, floor area of the dwelling, ventilation of the dwelling, total number of married couples in the household, number of married couples having separate room, kitchen type, floor type, wall type, roof type, monthly rent for hired accommodation, etc. In Block 7 information will be collected on duration of stay of the household in the present village or present slum/squatter settlement/ other areas of the town. Besides, some particulars regarding movement of the household to the present village or present slum/squatter settlement/ other areas of the town during the last 365 days will also be collected. For the households residing in slum/squatter settlement, information will also be collected in Block 7 on ’possession of documents by the head of the household that pertains to the residence status in the slum/squatter settlement’, ’whether the household received any benefit as a slum/squatter settlement dweller’, ’whether the household tried to move out of the slum/squatter settlement’, etc.
The major changes in the coverage of present Schedule of enquiry compared to the schedule structure of NSS 65th round are outlined below:
1. Block 3 (household characteristics)
a)New items of information added are:
i.age of the head of the household, 
ii.highest level of education among the members of the household, separately for males and females.
2. Block 4 (particulars of living facilities: drinking water, bathroom, sanitation, etc.)
a) The codes for collecting information on drinking water and sanitation facilities have been restructured to suit the data
requirements of Millennium Development Goals (MDG). 
b) For the households, whose principal source of drinking water is outside premises, additional information will be collected on: 
i. who fetches drinking water, 
ii. time taken, in a day, to reach the source of drinking water and back,
iii. waiting time, in a day, at the source of drinking water. 
c) Questions have been added on: 
i. quality of drinking water from the principal source, 
ii. method of treatment of drinking water by the household, 
iii. material of the main container in which drinking water is stored, 
iv. how drinking water is taken out from the main container, 
v. whether the household gets sufficient water throughout the year for all household activities (viz., drinking, cooking, washing, bathing, etc.) 
vi. frequency of supply of water,
vii. whether water is metered,
viii. average amount of water charges paid (payable) per month to the delivery agency/organisation/office. 
d) On the aspects of latrine facility, additional information will be collected on:
i. for the households which have access to latrine but are not using latrine, the reason for not using latrine, 
ii. whether all household members of specified age groups are using latrine, separately for male and female.
e) Three questions have been added regarding the problem of flies and mosquitoes, 
i. whether the household faced problem of flies/mosquitoes during last 365 days, 
ii. whether any effort was made by the Local Bodies/State Government during last 365 days to tackle problem of flies/mosquitoes, 
iii. whether any effort was made by the household during last 365 days to tackle problem of flies/mosquitoes. 
f) Considering the impact of hygiene on health, information will be collected on whether any of the household member(s) have suffered from specified types of illness during last 30 days. 
3. Block 5 (housing characteristics and micro environment)
a) Information on plinth area of the house will not be collected.
b) A new item on ’number of floor (s) in the house’ has been added.
c) Questions on (i) ’household waste water disposal system’, (ii) ’site where garbage is deposited after removal from the household’ and (iii) ’frequency of garbage clearance from the 
community dumping spot’ have been added. 
4. In Block 7 information will be collected on:
a) duration of stay of the household in the present village or present slum/squatter settlement/ other areas of the town,
b) some particulars regarding movement of the household to the present village or present slum/squatter settlement/ other areas of the town during the 
last 365 days,
c) For the households residing in slum/squatter settlement, additional information will be collected on 
i. possession of documents by the head of the household that pertains to the residence status in the slum/squatter settlement, 
ii. whether the household received any benefit as a slum/squatter settlement dweller, 
iii. whether the household tried to move out of the slum/squatter settlement and reasons for the same.
5. Detailed information on ’particulars of construction and repair for residential purpose’ as was collected in NSS 65th round (through Block 7) will not 
be collected. Instead, three items have been included in Block 3 (household characteristics) to collect information on ’amount spent’ and ’sources of 
finance’ for those households which have spent some amount on construction/first-hand purchase of houses/flats for residential purpose during last 
365 days.
KEYWORDS
Housing condition, Building, Flood risk, Approach Road, Dwelling, Living facilities, Building construction
Coverage
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE
The survey will cover the whole of the Indian Union. 
The rural areas such as (i) interior villages of Nagaland situated beyond five kilometres of the bus route and (ii) villages in Andaman and Nicobar Islands which remain inaccessible throughout the year were previously excluded from coverage. Henceforth, these areas will be covered in the survey after forming a State/UT level special stratum comprising these villages.
UNIVERSE
The survey used the interview method of data collection from a sample of randomly selected households and members of the household
Producers and Sponsors
PRIMARY INVESTIGATOR(S)
NameAffiliationNational Sample Survey Office M/o Statistcs and Programme Implementation(MOSPI),Government of India (GOI)OTHER PRODUCER(S)
NameAffiliationRoleSurvey Design Reearch Division National Sample Survey OfficeQuestionnaire Desgn, Sampling methodology,Survey ReportsField Operations Division National Sample Survey OfficeField WorkData Processing Division National Sample Survey OfficeData ProcessingNameAffiliationRoleComputer Centre M/o Statistcs and Programme Implementation(MOSPI),Government of India (GOI)DisseminationFUNDING
NameAbbreviationRoleM/o Statistics & Programme Implementation, GOI MOSPIOTHER ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
NameAffiliationRoleGoverning council and Working Group GOIFinalisation of survey study and QuestionnaireMetadata Production
METADATA PRODUCED BY
 
NameAbbreviationAffiliationRoleComputer CentreMOSPI, CCM/O Statistics & Programme ImplementationDocumentation of the studyDATE OF METADATA PRODUCTION 2014-01-27
DDI DOCUMENT VERSION Version 1.0 (Jan 2014)
DDI DOCUMENT ID DDI-IND-MOSPI-NSSO-69Rnd-Sch1dot2-2012
Sampling
Sampling Procedure
1.4 Sample Design 
1.4.1 Outline of sample design: A stratified multi-stage design has been adopted for the 69th round survey. The first stage units (FSU) will be the census villages (Panchayat wards in case of Kerala) in the rural sector and Urban Frame Survey (UFS) blocks in the urban sector. The ultimate stage units (USU) will be households in both the sectors. In case of large FSUs, one intermediate stage of sampling will be the selection of two hamlet-groups (hgs)/ sub-blocks (sbs) from each rural/ urban FSU. 
1.4.2 Sampling Frame for First Stage Units: For the rural sector, the list of 2001 census villages updated by excluding the villages urbanised and including the towns de-urbanised after 2001 census (henceforth the term ’village’ would mean Panchayat wards for Kerala) will constitute the sampling frame. For the urban sector, the latest updated list of UFS blocks (2007-12) will be considered as the sampling frame. 
1.4.3 Stratification: Within each district of a State/ UT, generally speaking, two basic strata will be formed: i) rural stratum comprising of all rural areas of the district and (ii) urban stratum comprising of all the urban areas of the district. However, within the urban areas of a district, if there are one or more towns with population 10 lakhs or more as per population census 2011 in a district, each of them will form a separate basic stratum and the remaining urban areas of the district will be considered as another basic stratum.
In case of rural sectors of Nagaland and Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the coverage has been extended to the entire State/UT from this round. In these two State/UTs, one separate special stratum will be formed within the State/UT consisting of all the interior and inaccessible villages which were not covered in previous rounds. 
1.4.4 Sub-stratification:
Rural sector r: If ’r’ be the sample size allocated for a rural stratum, the number of sub-strata formed will be ’r/2’. The villages within a district as per frame will be first arranged in ascending order of population. Then sub-strata 1 to ’r/2’ will be demarcated in such a way that each sub-stratum will comprise a group of villages of the arranged frame and have more or less equal population. 
Urban sector: Each stratum will be divided into 2 sub-strata as follows:
sub-stratum 1: all UFS blocks having area type ’slum area’ sub-stratum 2: remaining UFS blocks
1.4.5 Total sample size (FSUs): 8000 FSUs will be surveyed for the central sample at all-India level. For the state sample, there will be 9112 FSUs for all-India. In addition to this, some more sample FSUs (in the form of sub-sample 3) will be allocated exclusively for slum schedule. State wise allocation of sample FSUs is given in Table 1, page A-16.
1.4.6 Allocation of total sample to States and UTs: The total number of sample FSUs will be allocated to the States and UTs in proportion to population as per census 2011 subject to a minimum sample allocation to each State/ UT. While doing so, the resource availability in terms of number of field investigators as well as the comparability with previous round of survey on the same subjects will be kept in view.
1.4.7 Allocation of State/ UT level sample to rural and urban sectors: State/ UT level sample size will be allocated between two sectors in proportion to population as per census 2011 with double weightage to urban sector subject to the restriction that urban sample size for bigger states like Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu etc. should not exceed the rural sample size. A minimum of 16 FSUs (minimum 8 each for rural and urban sector separately) will be allocated to each state/ UT. 
1.4.8 Allocation to strata: Within each sector of a State/ UT, the respective sample size will be allocated to the different strata in proportion to the population as per census 2011 wherever the information is available, failing which information on population as per census 2001 will be used. Allocations at stratum level will be adjusted to multiples of 2 with a minimum sample size of 2. 
For special stratum in Nagaland and A & N Islands, 8 FSUs will be allocated to each. 
1.4.9 Allocation to sub-strata: 
1.4.9.1 Rural: Allocation will be 2 for each sub-stratum in rural. 
1.4.9.2 Urban: Stratum allocations will be distributed among the two sub-strata in proportion to the number of FSUs in the sub-strata. Minimum allocation for each sub-stratum will be 2. Equal number of samples will be allocated among the two sub-rounds. 
Also, an additional sample of FSUs in the form of sub-sample 3, equal to number of sample FSUs in each of the sub-samples 1 & 2 in the sub-stratum 1 only, will be allocated. 
1.4.10 Selection of FSUs: 
For the rural sector, from each stratum/ sub-stratum, required number of sample villages will be selected by probability proportional to size with replacement (PPSWR), size being the population of the village as per Census 2001. 
For the urban sector, UFS 2007-12 phase will be used for all towns and cities and from each stratum/sub-stratum FSUs will be selected by using Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR). 
Both rural and urban samples are to be drawn in the form of two independent sub-samples and equal number of samples will be allocated among the two sub rounds. For urban sub-stratum 1, additional samples will be drawn in the form of
sub-sample 3 independently.
1.4.11 Selection of hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks - important steps 
1.4.11.1 Proper identification of the FSU boundaries: The first task of the field investigators is to ascertain the exact boundaries of the sample FSU as per its identification particulars given in the sample list. For urban samples, the boundaries of each FSU may be identified by referring to the map corresponding to the frame code specified in the sample list. 
1.4.11.2 Criterion for hamlet-group/ sub-block formation: After identification of the boundaries of the FSU, it is to be determined whether listing will be done in the whole sample FSU or not. In case the approximate present population of the selected FSU is found to be 1200 or more, it will be divided into a suitable number (say, D) of ’hamlet-groups’ in the rural sector and ’sub-blocks’ in the urban sector by more or less equalising the population as stated below.
approximate present population of the sample FSU no. of hg’s/sb’s to be formed 
less than 1200 (no hamlet-groups/sub-blocks) 1 1200 to 1799 3 
1800 to 2399 4 
2400 to 2999 5 
3000 to 3599 6 
    ..and so on .
For rural areas of Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttarakhand (except four districts Dehradun (P), Nainital (P), Hardwar and Udham Singh Nagar), Poonch, Rajouri, Udhampur, Doda, Leh (Ladakh), Kargil districts of Jammu and Kashmir and Idukki district of Kerala, the number of hamlet-groups will be formed as follows: 
approximate present population of the sample village no. of hg’s to be formed 
less than 600 (no hamlet-groups) 1 600 to 899 3 
900 to 1199 4 
1200 to 1499 5 
1500 to 1799 6 .   ..and so on . 
1.4.11.3 Formation and selection of hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks: In case hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks are to be formed in the sample FSU, the same should be done by more or less equalizing population. Note that while doing so, it is to be ensured that the hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks formed are clearly identifiable in terms of physical landmarks. 
Two hamlet-groups (hg)/ sub-blocks (sb) will be selected from a large FSU wherever hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks have been formed in the following manner - one hg/ sb with maximum percentage share of population will always be selected and termed as hg/ sb 1; one more hg/ sb will be selected from the remaining hg’s/ sb’s by simple random sampling (SRS) and termed as hg/ sb 2. Listing and selection of the households will be done independently in the two selected hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks. The FSUs without hg/ sb formation will be treated as sample hg/ sb number 1. It is to be noted that if more than one hg/ sb have same maximum percentage share of population, the one among them which is listed first in block 4.2 of schedule 0.0 will be treated as hg/ sb 1.
1.5 Listing of households: Having determined the hamlet-groups/ sub-blocks, i.e. area(s) to be considered for listing, the next step is to list all the households (including those found to be temporarily locked after ascertaining the temporariness of locking of households through local enquiry). The hamlet-group/ sub-block with sample hg/ sb number 1 will be considered for listing first, to be followed by the listing of households within the sample hg/sb number 2.
1.6 Formation of second stage strata and allocation of households 
1.6.1 Two cut-off points ’A’ and ’B’ (in ‘) have been determined from NSS 66th round data for each NSS region for urban areas in such a way that top 10% of the population have MPCE more than ’B’ and bottom 30% of the population have MPCE less than A. The values of A and B for each NSS Region have been given in Chapter two.
1.6.2 Households listed in the selected FSU/ hamlet-group/ sub-block will be stratified into three second stage strata (SSS). Composition of the SSS and number of households to be surveyed from different SSS will be as follows:
SSS composition of SSS number of households to be surveyed 
FSU without hg/sb formation FSU with hg/sb formation (for each hg/sb) Rural 
SSS 1: households having pucca dwelling structure 4 2 
SSS 2: households having semi-pucca dwelling structure 4 2 SSS 3: other households (including those with no structure) 4 2 Urban 
SSS 1: households having MPCE of top 10% of urban population (MPCE > B) 2 1 
SSS 2: households having MPCE of middle 60% of urban population (A = MPCE = B) 4 2 SSS 3: households having MPCE of bottom 30% of urban population (MPCE < A) 6 3 
1.6.3 The above table provides the plan of allocation of the sample household in the respective SSS. However, there can be situations in the selected FSUs both in rural and urban sectors where adequate number of households is not available for required allocation. In such situation, the selection of household for the SSS is compensated from the other SSS. This is done by adopting specified procedure. To meet the shortfall of households in one SSS compensation can be made from other SSSs. The details of the compensation rules are given in the Chapter two dealing with Schedule 0.0.
Deviations from Sample Design
There was no deviation from the original sample deviation.
This document was truncated here because it was created in the Evaluation Mode.
Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/
10
